Open your ears,
for which of you will stop thevent of hearing
when loud rumor speaks?
I, from the orient to thedrooping west,
making the wind my post-horse,
still unfold the acts commencedon this ball of earth.
I run before King Harry'svictory,
who, in a bloody field byShrewsbury,
hath beaten down young Hotspurand his troops,
quenching the flame of boldrebellion
even with the rebel's blood.
But what mean I to speak so trueat first?
My office is to noise abroadthat Harry Monmouth fell
under the wrath of nobleHotspur's sword,
and that the king, before theDouglas' rage,
stooped his anointed head as lowas death.
This have I rumored through thepeasant towns
between that royal field ofShrewsbury
and this worm-eaten hold ofragged stone,
where Hotspur's father, oldNorthumberland,
lies crafty-sick.
The posts come tiring on...
and not a man of them bringsother news
than they have learnt of me.
From rumor's tongues,
they bring smooth comfortsfalse,
worse than true wrongs.
What news, Lord Bardolph?
Every minute now should be thefather of some stratagem.
The times are wild.
Contention, like a horse full ofhigh feeding,
madly hath broke loose and bearsdown all before him.
Noble earl, I bring you certainnews from Shrewsbury.
Good, an God will.
As good as heart can wish.
The king is almost wounded tothe death,
and, in the fortune of my lordyour son,
Prince Harry slain.
But how was this derived?
Saw you the field?
Came you from Shrewsbury?
I spake with one, my lord, thatcame from thence,
a gentleman well bred and ofgood name,
who freely rendered me thesenews for true.
My lord, a gentleman almostforspent with speed,
stopped hard by me to breathehis bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester,
and of him I did demand whatnews from Shrewsbury.
He told me that rebellion hadbad luck,
and that young Harry Percy'sspur was cold.
My lord, I'll tell you what.
If my young lord your son havenot the day,
upon mine honor,
for a silken point I'll give mybarony.
Never talk of it.
My Lord, I spakeó
Speak not of that you do notknow.
Yea, this man's brow, like to atitle piece,
foretells the nature of a tragicvolume.
Say, Morton, didst thou comefrom Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury, my noblelord,
where hateful death put on hisugliest mask
to fright our party.
And how doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest.
The whiteness in thy cheek
is apter than thy tongue to tellthy errand.
Douglas is living,
and your brother, yet.
But, for my lord your sonó
Why, he is dead.
See what a ready tonguesuspicion hath.
I cannot think, my lord, yourson is dead.
I am sorry I should force you tobelieve
that which I would to God I hadnot seen.
But these mine eyes saw him inbloody state,
rendering faint quittance,
wearied and out-breathed toHarry Monmouth,
whose swift wrath beat down
the never daunted Percy to theearth,
from whence with life he nevermore sprung up.
For this I shall have timeenough to mourn.
In poison there is physic.
and these news, having beenwell,
that would have made me sick,
being sick, have in some measuremade me well.
Now bind my brows with iron
and approach the ragged'st hourthat time and spite dare bring
to frown upon the enragedNorthumberland.
Let heaven kiss earth.
Let not nature's hand keep thewild flood confined.
Let order die.
And let this world no longer bea stage
to feed contention in alingering act.
But let one spirit of thefirstborn Cain
reign in all bosoms,
that each heart, being set onbloody courses,
the rude scene may end,
and darkness be the burier ofthe dead.
This strained passion doth youwrong, my lord.
We all that are engaged to thisloss
knew that we ventured on suchdangerous seas
that if we wrought our life'twas ten to one.
And yet we ventured,
for the gain proposed choked therespect of likely peril feared.
And since we are o'erset,venture again.
Come.
We will all put forth body andgoods.
'Tis more than time.
And, my most noble lord, I hearfor certain
and dare speak the truth,
the gentle archbishop of York isup with well-appointed powers.
He turns insurrection toreligion.
Supposed sincere and holy in histhoughts,
he's followed both with body andwith mind
and doth enlarge his rising withthe blood of fair King Richard,
scraped from Pomfret stones;
derives from heaven his quarreland his cause;
tells them he doth bestride ableeding land
gasping for life under greatBolingbroke.
And more and less do flock tofollow him.
I knew of this before, but, tospeak truth,
this present grief had wiped itfrom my mind.
Go in with me and counsel everyman
the aptest way for safety andrevenge.
Sirrah, you giant,
what says the doctor to mywater?
He said, sir, the water itself
was a good, clean, healthywater.
But for the party that owed it,
he might have more diseases thanhe knew for.
Men of all sorts take a pride togird at me.
The brain of this foolishcompounded clay, man,
is not able to invent anythingthat tends to laughter,
more than I invent or isinvented on me.
I'm not only witty in myself,
but the cause that wit is inother men.
I do here walk before thee likea sow
that has overwhelmed all herlitter but one.
If the prince put thee into myservice
for any other reason than to setme off,
why, then I have no judgment.
Thou whoreson mandrake.
Thou art fitter to be worn in mycap
than to wait at my heels.
What said Master Dombledon
about the satin for my shortcloak and my slops?
He said, sir, you should procurehim
better assurance than Bardolph.
He would not take his band noryours.
He liked not the security.
A whoreson Achitophel.
A rascally yea-forsooth knave
to bear a gentleman in hand andthen stand upon security.
I had as lief they'd putratsbane in my mouth
as offer to stop it withsecurity.
Where is Bardolph?
He's gone into Smithfield to buyyour worship a horse.
I bought him in Paul's.
He'll buy me a horse inSmithfield.
An I could get me but a wife inthe stews,
I were manned, horsed, andwived.
Sir, here comes that nobleman
that committed the prince forstriking him about Bardolph.
Wait, close.
I will not see him.
What's he that goes there?
Falstaff, an't please yourlordship.
He that was in question for therobbery?
He, my lord.
But he hath since done goodservice at Shrewsbury,
and, as I hear,
is now going with some charge tothe Lord John of Lancaster.
What, to York?
Call him back again.
Sir John Falstaff.
Boy, tell him I'm deaf.
You will have to speak louder.
My master is deaf.
I'm sure he isó
to the hearing of anything good.
Go pluck him by the elbow.
I must speak with him.
Sir John.
What?
A young knave, and begging?
Is there not wars?
Is there not employment?
Sir, my lord would speak withyou.
Sir John Falstaff, a word withyou.
Oh, my lord.
God give your lordship good timeof day.
I am glad to see Your Lordshipabroad.
I heard say your lordship wassick.
I hope your lordship goes abroadby advice.
Your lordship, though not cleanpast your youth,
hath yet some smack of age inyou,
some relish of the saltness oftime,
and I must humbly beseech yourlordship
to have a reverent care of yourhealth.
Sir John, I sent for you
before your expedition toShrewsbury.
An't please your lordship,
I hear that His Majesty isreturned
with some discomfort from Wales.
I talk not of His Majesty.
You would not come when I sentfor you.
And I hear, moreover, that HisHighness is fallen
into this same whoresonapoplexy.
Well, God mend him.
I pray you, let me speak withyou.
This apoplexy, as I take it,
is a kind of lethargy, an'tplease your lordship,
a kind of sleeping in the blood,
a whoreson tingling.
What tell you me of it?
Be it as it is.
It hath its original from muchgrief,
from study and perturbation ofthe brain.
I have read the cause of hiseffects in Galen.
It's a kind of deafness.
I think you are fallen into thedisease.
You hear not what I say to you.
Oh, very well, my lord; verywell.
Rather, an't please you, it'sthe disease of not listening,
the malady of not marking, thatI am troubled withal.
To punish you by the heels
would amend the attention ofyour ears.
And I care not if I do becomeyour physician.
I sent for you
when there were matters againstyou for your life.
As I was then advised by mylearned counsel,
I did not come.
Well, the truth is, Sir John,you live in great infamy.
He that buckles him in my beltcannot live in less.
Your means are very slender, andyour waste is great.
I would it were otherwise.
I would my means were greaterand my waist slenderer.
You have misled the youthfulprince.
The young prince hath misled me.
I am the fellow with the greatbelly,
and he my dog.
Well, I am loath to gall a newhealed wound.
Your day's service at Shrewsburyhath a little gilded over
your night's exploit atGadshill.
But since all is well, keep itso.
You follow the young prince upand down like his ill angel.
Not so, my lord.
You that are old consider not
the capacities of us that areyoung.
Will you set your name down inthe scroll of youth
that are written down old withall the characters of age?
Have you not a moist eye,
a dry hand,
a yellow cheek,
a white beard,
a decreasing leg,
an increasing belly?
Is not your voice broken,
your wind short,
your chin double,
your wit single,
and every part about you blastedwith antiquity?
And yet will you call yourselfyoung?
Fie, fie, fie, Sir John.
My lord, I was born at about3:00 in the afternoon
with a white head and somethingof a round belly.
For my voice,
I have lost it with halloing andsinging of anthems.
The truth is, I'm only old injudgment and understanding.
And he that will caper with mefor 1,000 marks,
would him lend me the money andhave at him.
For the box of the ear that theprince gave you,
he gave it like a rude prince,
and you took it like a sensiblelord.
I have chequed him for it, andthe young lion repents.
Marry, not in ashes andsackcloth,
but in new silk and old sack.
Well, God send the prince abetter companion.
God send the companion a betterprince.
I cannot rid my hands of him.
Well, the king hath severed you.
I hear you are going with LordJohn of Lancaster
against the archbishop and theearl of Northumberland.
Yea, I thank your pretty sweetwit for it.
But look you pray, all you thatkiss my lady peace at home,
that our armies meet not in ahot day,
for, by the Lord, I take but twoshirts out with me,
and I mean not to sweatextraordinarily.
There is not a dangerous actioncan peep out his head
but I am thrust upon it.
Well, I cannot last ever.
but it was alway yet the trickof our English nation,
if they have a good thing, tomake it too common.
If ye will needs say I'm an oldman,
you should give me rest.
I would to God my name were not
so terrible to the enemy as itis.
I were better to be eaten todeath with a rust
than to be scoured to nothingwith perpetual motion.
Well, be honest, be honest,
and God bless your expedition.
Will your lordship lend me£1,000 to furnish me forth?
Not a penny; not a penny.
Fare you well.
Commend me to my cousinWestmoreland.
If I do, fillip me with athree-man beetle.
Boy, what money's in my purse?
Seven groats and two pence.
I can get no remedy against thisconsumption of the purse.
Borrowing only lingers andlingers it out,
but the disease is incurable.
Go bear this letter to my lordof Lancaster,
this to the prince,
this to the earl ofWestmoreland,
and this to old mistress Ursula,
whom I have weekly sworn tomarry
since I perceived the firstwhite hair on my chin.
About it.
You know where to find me.
A pox of this gout or a gout ofthis pox,
for the one or the other playsthe rogue with my great toe.
Well, 'tis no matter if I dohalt.
I have the wars for my color,
and my pension shall seem themore reasonable.
A good wit will make use ofanything.
I will turn diseases tocommodity.
Thus have you heard our causeand known our means.
My most noble friends, I prayyou all,
speak plainly your opinions ofour hopes.
Our present musters grow uponthe file
to 25,000 men of choice,
and our supplies live largely
in the hopes of greatNorthumberland,
whose bosom burns with anincensed fire of injuries.
The question then, LordHastings, standeth thus:
whether our present 25,000
may hold up head withoutNorthumberland?
With him, we may.
Aye, marry, there's the point.
But if without him we be thoughttoo feeble,
my judgment is, we should notstep too far
till we had his assistance bythe hand.
For in a theme so bloody facedas this,
conjecture, expectation, andsurmise of aids incertain
should not be admitted.
Very true, Lord Bardolph,
for indeed it was youngHotspur's case at Shrewsbury.
It was, my lord, who linedhimself with hopes,
eating the air on promise ofsupply,
flattering himself in project ofa power
much smaller than the smallestof his thoughts.
And so with great imaginationproper to madmen,
led his powers to death andwinking leaped into destruction.
But, by your leave, it never yetdid hurt
to lay down likelihoods andforms of hope.
I think we are a body strongenough,
even as we are, to equal withthe king.
What, is the king but 25,000?
To us no more.
Nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph.
For his divisions, as the timesdo brawl,
Are in three heads:
one power against the French andone against Glendower,
perforce the third must take upus.
So is the unfirm king in threedivided,
and his coffers sound withhollow poverty and emptiness.
That he should draw his severalstrengths together
and come against us in fullpuissance,
need not be dreaded.
Let us on and publish theoccasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick oftheir own choice.
Their overgreedy love hathsurfeited.
They that when Richard livedwould have him die
are now become enamored on hisgrave.
Thou that threw'st dust upon hisgoodly head
when through proud London hecame sighing on
after the admired heels ofBolingbroke.
Shall we go draw our numbers andset on?
We are time's subjects, and timebids be gone.
Master Fang, have you enteredthe action?
It is entered.
Master Snare, we must arrest SirJohn Falstaff.
I pray you, since my action isentered
and my case so openly known tothe world,
let Sir John be brought in tohis answer.
A hundred mark is a long one fora poor lone woman to bear,
and I have borne and borne andborne
and been fubbed off and fubbedoff and fubbed off
from this day to that day
that it is a shame to be thoughton.
There's no honesty in suchdealing,
unless a woman should be made anass and a beast
to bear every knave's wrongs.
Yonder he comes,
and that errant, malmsey noseknave, Bardolph, with him.
Do your office.
Do your office, Master Fang.
Do me, do me, do me your office.
How now.
What's the matter?
Whose mare's dead?
Sir John, I arrest you at thesuit of Mistress Quickly.
Away, varlets.
Draw, Bardolph.
Cut me off the villain's head.
Throw the quean in the channel.
Throw me in the channel!
I'll throw thee in the channel.
Wilt thou?
Thou bastardly rogue!
Murder, murder!
Ah, thou honeysuckle villain.
Wilt thou kill God's messengersand the king's?
Oh, good people, send a rescueor two.
Wo't thou?
Keep the peace here, ho!
My lord, be good to me.
I beseech you, stand to me.
How now, Sir John.
What are you brawling here?
Doth this become your time, yourplace, and business?
You should have been well onyour way to York.
My most worshipful lord,
an't please Your Grace that I'ma poor widow of Eastcheap,
and he is arrested at my suit.
For what sum?
Well, 'tis more than for some,my lord.
It is for all, all I have.
He has eaten me out of house andhome.
He's put all my substance intothat fat belly of his.
How comes this, Sir John?
Are you not ashamed to enforce apoor widow
to so rough a course to come byher own?
What is the gross sum that I owethee?
If thou wert an honest man,thyself and the money too.
Thou didst swear upon aparcel-gilt goblet,
sitting in my Dolphin chamber atthe round table
before a sea coal fire onWednesday in Wheeson week,
when the prince broke thy headfor liking his father
to a singing man of Windsor,
thou didst swear, as I waswashing thy wound,
to marry me and make me my ladythy wife.
Canst thou deny it?
And didst thou not kiss me
and bid me fetch thee 30shillings?
I put thee now to thy book oath.
Deny it, if thou canst.
My lord, this is a poor, madsoul,
and she says up and down thetown
that her eldest son is like you.
She hath been in good case,
and the truth is, poverty hathdistracted her.
But for these foolish officers,
I beseech you I may have redressagainst them.
Sir John, Sir John, I am wellaware
of your manner of wrenching thetrue cause the false way.
It is not a confident brow northe throng of words,
which come with such more thanimpudent sauciness from you,
can thrust me from a levelconsideration.
You have, so it appears to me,
practiced upon the easy yieldingspirit of this poor woman
and made her serve your usesboth in purse and in person.
Yea, good faith, my lord.
I pray you, peace.
Pay her the debt you owe her
and unpay the villainy you havedone with her.
The one you may do with sterlingmoney
and the other with currentrepentance.
My lord, I will not undergo thissneap without reply.
You call honorable boldnessimpudent sauciness.
If a man will make courtesy andsay nothing, he is virtuous.
No, my good lord.
My humble duty remembered, Iwill not be your suitor.
I say to you that I do
desire deliverance from theseofficers,
being upon hasty employment inthe king's affairs.
You speak as having power to dowrong,
but answer in the effect of yourreputation
and satisfy the poor woman.
Come hither, hostess.
Come hither.
My lord!
Master Gower, what news?
The king, my lord, and Harry,Prince of Wales,
are near at hand.
The rest the paper tells.
No more words on.
Faith, you said so before.
No more words; I'm a gentleman.
No more words on.
By this heavenly ground I treadon,
I will be fain to pawn
both my plate and the tapestriesin my dining chambers.
Let it be ten pound, if thoucanst.
No, no, no, no, no.
An't 'twere not for thy humors,
there's not a better wench inEngland.
Go wash thy face and draw theaction.
Go on.
I pray thee, Sir John, let it bebut 20 noble.
I would be loath to pawn myplate, so God save me.
La!
Let it alone.
I'll make other shift.
You'll be a fool still.
Well, you shall have it, and Ipawn my gown.
I hope you'll come to supper.
You will pay me all together?
Will I live?
Go with her, with her.
Hook on; hook on.
Will you have Doll Tearsheetcome meet you to supper?
No more words.
Let's have her.
I have heard better news.
What is the news, my lord?
Where lay the king tonight?
At Basingstoke, my lord.
I hope, my lord, all's well.
What is the news, my lord?
Come all his forces back?
No, 1,500 foot, 500 horse aremarched up
to my lord of Lancaster,
against Northumberland and thearchbishop.
Comes the king back from Wales,my noble lord?
You shall have letters of mepresently.
Come, go along with me, goodMaster Gower.
My lord.
What is the matter?
Master Gower, shall I entreatyou to dinner with me?
I must wait upon my good lordhere.
I thank you, good Sir John.
Sir John, you loiter here toolong,
being as you are to takesoldiers up
in counties as you go.
Will you sup with me, MasterGower?
What foolish master taught youthese manners, Sir John?
Master Gower, if they become menot,
he was a fool that taught themme.
This is the right fencing grace,my lord.
Tap for tap, and so part fair.
May the Lord lighten thee.
Thou art a great fool.
Before God, I'm exceeding weary.
Is't come to that?
I had thought weariness durstnot have attached
one of so high blood.
Faith, it does me,
though it discolors thecomplexion of my greatness
to acknowledge it.
Doesn't it show vilely in me todesire small beer?
Why, a prince should not be soloosely studied
as to remember so weak acomposition.
Belike then my appetite was notprincely got.
For, by my troth,
I do now remember the poorcreature, small beer.
Indeed, these humbleconsiderations
make me out of love with mygreatness.
What a disgrace is it to me toremember thy name
or to know thy face tomorrow
or to take note how many pair ofsilk stockings thou hastó
viz these, and those that werethy peach-colored onesó
or to bear the inventory of thyshirts,
as one for superfluity andanother for use.
But that the tennis court keeperknows better than I,
for it is a low ebb of linenwith thee
when thou keepest not racketthere.
How ill it follows, after youhave labored so hard,
you should talk so idly.
Tell me, how many good, youngprinces would do so,
their fathers being so sick asyours at this time is?
Shall I tell thee one thing,Poins?
Yes, faith,
and let it be an excellent, goodthing.
It shall serve among wits of nohigher breeding than thine.
Go to.
I stand the push of your onething you will tell.
Marry, I tell thee,
it is not meet that I should besad, now my father is sick.
Albeit I could tell to thee, asto one it pleases me,
for fault of a better, to callmy friend,
I could be sad,
and sad indeed too.
Very hardly upon such a subject.
By this hand, thou thinkest me
as far in devil's book as thouand Falstaff
for obduracy and persistency.
Let the end try the man.
I tell thee, my heart bleedsinwardly,
my father is so sick.
And keeping such vile company asthou art
hath in reason taken from me allostentation of sorrow.
The reason?
What wouldst thou think of me ifI should weep?
Why, I would think thee a mostprincely hypocrite.
It would be every man's thought,
and thou art a blessed fellow tothink so as every man thinks.
Never a man's thought in theworld
keeps the roadway better thanthine.
Every man would think me ahypocrite indeed.
And what accites your mostworshipful thought to think so?
Why, because you have been solewd and engrafted to Falstaff.
And to thee.
By this light, I am well spokeon.
I can hear it with my own ears.
The worst they can say of me isthat I am a second brother
and that I am a proper fellow ofmy hands.
And those two things, I confess,I cannot help.
God save Your Grace.
And yours, most noble Bardolph.
How doth thy master?
Well, my lord,
he hath heard of Your Gracecoming to town.
There's a letter for you.
Delivered with good respect.
And how doth the martlemas, yourmaster?
In bodily health, sir.
Marry, the immortal part needs aphysician,
but that moves not him.
Though that be sick, it diesnot.
I do allow this wen to be
as familiar with me as my dog.
And he holds his place, for lookyou how be writes.
"Sir John Falstaff, knight,
"to the son of the king, nearesthis father,
"Harry, Prince of Wales,
greeting."
Why, this is a certificate.
Peace.
"I will imitate the honorableRomans in brevityó"
He sure means brevity in breath,short-winded.
"I commend me to thee, I commendthee, and I leave thee.
"Be not too familiar with Poins,
"for he misuses thy favors somuch
"that he swears thou art tomarry his sister, Nell.
"Repent at idle times as thoumayest.
"And so farewell.
"Thine by yea and by no,
"which is as much as to say, asthou usest him,
"Jack Falstaff with myfamiliars,
"John with my brothers andsisters,
and Sir John with all Europe."
My lord, I'll steep this letterin sack and make him eat it.
That's to make him eat 20 of hiswords.
Do you use me thus, Ned?
Must I marry your sister?
God send the wench no worsefortune.
But I never said so.
Well, thus we play the foolswith the time,
and the spirits of the wise sitin the clouds and mock us.
Is thou master here in town?
Oh, yea, my lord.
Where sups he?
Doth the old boar feed at theold frank?
At the old place, my lord, inEastcheap.
What company?
Ephesians, my lord, of the oldchurch.
Sup any women with him?
None, my lord,
but old Mistress Quickly andMistress Doll Tearsheet.
What pagan may that be?
A proper gentlewoman, sir, and akinswoman of my master's.
Even such kin as the parishheifers are to the town bull.
Shall we steal upon them, Ned,at supper?
I am your shadow, my lord.
I'll follow you.
Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph,
no word to your master that I amyet come to town.
Here's for your silence.
I have no tongue, sir.
And for mine, I will govern it.
Fare you well.
Go.
This Doll Tearsheet should besome road.
I warrant you, as common as theroad
between Saint Alban's andLondon.
How might we see Falstaff bestowhimself tonight
in his true colors, and notourselves be seen?
Put on two leathern jerkins andaprons,
and wait upon his table asdrawers.
From a god to a bull?
A heavy descension.
It was Jove's case.
From a prince to a prentice?
A low transformation.
That shall be mine,
for in everything the purposemust weigh with the folly.
Follow me, Ned.
I pray thee, loving wife andgentle daughter,
give even way unto my roughaffairs.
Put not you on the visage of thetimes
and be like them to Percytroublesome.
I have given over.
I will speak no more.
Do what you will.
Your wisdom be your guide.
Alas, sweet wife, my honor is atpawn,
and, but my going, nothing canredeem it.
Oh, yet, for God's sake, go notto these wars.
The time was, Father, that youbroke your word,
when you were more endeared toit than now,
when your own Percy,
when my heart's dear Harry,
threw many a northward look tosee his father
bring up his powers.
But he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stayat home?
There were two honors lost,yours and your son's.
For yours, may the God of heavenbrighten it.
For his, it stuck upon him
as the sun in the gray vault ofheaven,
and by his light did all thechivalry of England
move to do brave acts.
He was indeed the glass
wherein the noble youth diddress themselves.
He had no legs that practicednot his gait.
And speaking thick, which naturemade his blemish,
became the accents of thevaliant;
for those that could speak lowand tardily
would turn their own perfectionsto abuse,
to seem like him.
So that in speech, in gait, indiet, in affections of delight,
in military rules, humors ofblood,
he was the mark and glass, copyand book,
that fashioned others.
And himó
oh, wondrous him,
oh, miracle of menó
him did you leave,
second to none, unseconded byyou,
to look upon the hideous god ofwar in disadvantage,
to abide a field where nothingbut the sound of Hotspur's name
did seem defensible.
So you left him.
Never, oh, never, do his ghostthe wrong
to hold your honor more preciseand nice
with others than with him.
Let them alone.
The marshal and the archbishopare strong.
Had my sweet Harry had but halftheir numbers,
today might I, hanging onHotspur's neck,
have talked of Monmouth's grave.
Beshrew your heart.
Fair daughter, you do draw myspirits from me
with new lamenting ancientoversights.
But I must go and meet withdanger there,
or it will seek me in anotherplace
and find me worse provided.
Oh, fly to Scotland,
till that the nobles and thearmed commons
have of their puissance made alittle taste.
If they get ground and vantageof the king,
then join you with them, like arib of steel,
to make strength stronger.
But, for all our loves, firstlet them try themselves.
So did your son.
He was so suffered.
So came I a widow
and never shall have length oflife enough
to rain upon remembrance withmine eyes,
that it may grow and sprout ashigh as heaven,
for recordation to my noblehusband.
'Tis with my mind as with thetide swelled up unto his height
that makes a stillstand, runningneither way.
Fain would I go to meet thearchbishop,
but many thousand reasons holdme back.
I will resolve for Scotland.
There am I till time and vantagecrave my company.
I' faith, sweetheart,
methinks now you are in anexcellent good temperality.
Your pulsidge beats asextraordinarily
as heart would desire,
and your color, I warrant you,
it's as red as any rose, in goodtruth, la!
But by faith, you have drunk toomuch canaries,
and that's a marvelous searchingwine,
and it perfumes the blood ereone can say "What's this?"
How do you now?
Better than I was.
Why, that's well said, a goodheart's worth gold.
Lo, here comes Sir John.
When Arthur first in courtó
empty the jordan.
How now, Mistress Doll.
Sick of a calm; yea, good faith.
So is all her sect.
An they be once in a calm, theyare sick.
A pox, damn you.
You muddy rascal.
Is that all the comfort you giveme?
You make fat rascals, MistressDoll.
I make them?
Gluttony and diseases make them.
I make them not.
If the cook help to make thegluttony,
you help to make the diseases,Mistress Doll.
We catch of you, Doll; we catchof you.
Grant that, my poor virtue;grant that.
Hang yourself, you muddy conger.
Hang yourself.
By my troth, this is the oldfashion.
You two never meet but you fallto some discord.
You are both, in good faith, asrheumatic as two dry toasts.
You cannot one won bear withanother's confirmities.
What the goodyear.
One must bear, and that must beyou.
You are the weaker vessel, asthey say, the emptier vessel.
Can a weak, empty vessel bearsuch a huge, full hogshead?
There's a whole merchant'svessel
of Bourdeaux stuff in him.
You have not seen a hulk betterstuffed in the hold.
Come, I'll be friends with thee,Jack.
Thou art going to the wars.
And whether I shall ever seethee again or no,
there is nobody cares.
Sir, ancient Pistol is below andwould speak with you.
Hang him, swaggering rascal.
Let him not come hither.
It is the foul-mouthed'st roguein England.
If he swagger, let him not comehere.
No, by my troth.
I must live among my neighbors.
I'll no swaggerers.
I am in good name and fame withthe very best.
Shut the door.
There comes no swaggerers here.
I have not lived all this whileto have swaggering now.
Shut the door, I pray you.
Dost thou hear, hostess?
Pray you, pacify yourself, SirJohn.
There comes no swaggerers here.
Dost thou hear?
It is mine ancient.
Tilly-fally, Sir John.
Your ancient swaggerer comes notin my doors.
I was before Master Tisick, thedeputy, t'other day,
and, as he said to me,
'twas no longer ago thanWednesday last, by my faith.
"Neighbor Quickly," says he.
Master Dumbe, our minister, wasby then.
"Neighbor Quickly," says he,
"Receive those that are civil,
"for," said he, "you are in anill name."
Now a' said so, I can tellwhereupon.
"For," said he,
"You are an honest woman andwell thought of.
"Therefore take heed what guestsyou receive.
Receive no swaggeringcompanions."
There comes none here.
You would bless you to hear whathe said.
No, I'll no swaggerers.
He's no swaggerer.
A tame cheater, i' faith.
You may stroke him as gentle asa puppy greyhound.
Call him up, Bardolph.
Cheater, call you him?
I will bar no honest man myhouse, nor no cheater,
but I do not love swaggering.
I am the worse, when one saysswagger.
Feel, masters, how I shake.
Oh, look you, I warrant you.
So you do, hostess.
Do I?
Yea, in good faith, do I, an'twere an aspen leaf.
Oh, I cannot abide swaggerers.
God save you, Sir John.
Welcome, ancient Pistol.
Pistol, I charge you with a cupof sack.
Do you discharge upon minehostess?
I will discharge her, Sir John,with two bullets.
She's Pistol-proof, sir.
You shall not hardly offend her.
Come, I'll drink no proofs norno bullets.
I'll drink no more than will dome good
for no man's pleasure, I.
Then to you, Mistress Dorothy, Iwill charge you.
Charge me?
I scorn you, scurvy companion.
What, you poor, base, mean,rascally,
cheating, lack linen mate.
Away, you moldy rogue; away.
I am meat for your master.
I know you, Mistress Dorothy.
Away, you cutpurse rascal.
You filthy bung, away.
By this wine, I'll thrust myknife into your moldy chaps
an you play the saucy cuttlewith me.
Away, you bottle ale rascal.
You basket hilt stale juggler,you.
Since when, I pray you, sir?
God's light, with two points onyour shoulders?
Much.
God's my life, I will murder herruff for this.
No more, Pistol.
I would not have you go offhere.
Discharge yourself of ourcompany, Pistol.
No, Captain Pistol; not here,sweet captain.
Captain?
Thou abominable damned cheater,
art thou not ashamed to becalled captain?
An captains were of my mind,they would truncheon you out
for taking their names upon youbefore you earned them.
You a captain?
You slave, for what?
For tearing a poor whore's ruffin a bawdy house?
He a captain.
Hang him, rogue.
He lives upon moldy stewedprunes and dried cakes.
A captain.
Therefore captains had need lookto it.
Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.
Come.
Good ancient.
Thou sayest, good ancient.
Well, IóI tell thee, CorporalBardolph,
I shall tear her.
I'll be revenged of her.
Good Captain Pistol, be quiet.
'Tis very late.
I beseech you, aggravate yourcholer.
These be good humors, indeed.
Shall packhorses and hollowpampered jades of Asia
that cannot go up 30 mile a day,
compare with Caesar and withcannibals and Trojan Greeks?
Nay, rather damn them with KingCerberus,
and let the welkin roar.
Shall we fall foul for toys?
By my troth, captain, these arebitter words.
Then feed and be fat, my fairCalipolis.
Come, give's some sack.
"Si fortune me tormente, speratome contento."
Pray thee, go down.
Go down.
Fear we broadsides?
No, the fiend give fire.
Sweetheart, lie thou there.
What?
We come to full points here, andare etceteras nothing?
Pistol, I would be quiet.
Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf.
What, we have seen the sevenstars.
For God's sake, thrust himdownstairs.
I cannot endure such a fustianrascal.
Thrust me down stairs?
Quoit him down, Bardolph, like ashovegroat shilling.
This will grow to a brawl anon.
Pray you downstairs.
Shall we have incision?
Shall we imbrue?
Then death rock me asleep.
Abridge my doleful days.
Why, then, let grievous,ghastly, gaping wounds
untwine the Sisters Three.
Come, Atropos, I say.
This is goodly stuff toward.
Boy, give me my rapier.
I pray thee, Jack.
I pray thee, do not draw.
Get you downstairs.
I'll forswear housekeeping
afore I'll be in these terretsand frights.
I pray you, Jack, be quiet.
The rascal's gone.
Ah, you whoreson, little valiantvillain, you.
Are you not hurt i' the groin?
Methought a' made a shrewdthrust at your belly.
Have you thrust him out o'doors?
Aye, Sir John.
The rascal's drunk.
You hurt him, sir, in theshoulder.
A rascal to brave me.
You sweet little rogue, you.
Alas, poor ape, how thou sweats.
Come, let me wipe thy face.
Come on, you whoreson chops.
I' faith, I love thee.
Thou art as valorous as Hectorof Troy,
worth five of Agamemnon,
and ten times better than theNine Worthies.
Ah, villain.
A rascally slave.
I'll toss the rogue in ablanket.
Do, an thou darest for thyheart.
An thou dost, I'll canvass theebetween a pair of sheets.
The music is come, sir.
What?
The music is come.
Well, let them play.
Play, sirs.
Come sit on my knee, Doll.
A rascal bragging slave.
The rogue fled from me likequicksilver.
I' faith,
and thou followedst him likechurch.
You whoreson, little, tidyBartholomew boar pig,
when wilt thou leave fighting o'days and foining o' nights,
and begin to patch up thine oldbody for heaven?
Peace, good Doll,
do not speak like adeath's-head.
Do not bid me remember mine end.
Sirrah, what humor's the princeof?
A good, shallow young fellow
who would have made a goodpantler,
would ha' chipped bread well.
They say that Poins has a goodwit.
He a good wit?
Hang him, baboon.
His wit's as thick as Tewksburymustard.
Why does the prince love him so,then?
Because their legs are both of abigness
and a' plays at quoits well andswears with a good grace
and such other gambol facultiesa' has
that show a weak mind and anable body.
For the prince himself is suchanother.
The weight of a hair
will turn the scales betweentheir avoirdupois.
Would not this nave of a wheelhave his ears cut off?
Let's beat him before his whore.
Look, whether withered elder
hath not his poll clawed like aparrot.
Is it not strange that desire
should so many years outliveperformance?
Kiss me, Doll.
Saturn and Venus this year inconjunction.
What says the almanac to that?
Thou dost give me flatteringbusses.
By my troth, I kiss thee with amost constant heart.
I am old.
I love thee better
than I love e'er a scurvy youngboy of them all.
What stuff wilt have a kirtleof?
I shall receive money o'Thursday.
Shall have a cap tomorrow.
A merry song, come.
It grows late.
We'll to bed.
Thou'lt forget me when I amgone.
By my troth,
thou sets me a-weeping, an thousayest so.
Prove that ever I dress myselfhandsome till thy return.
Well, harken at the end.
Some sack, Francis.
Anon, anon, sir.
A bastard son of the king's.
And art not thou Poins, hisbrother?
Why, thou globe of sinfulcontinents,
what a life dost thou lead.
A better than thou.
I'm a gentleman; thou art adrawer.
Very true, sir,
and I come to draw you out bythe ears.
Oh, the Lord bless that sweetface of thine.
Oh, Jesu, are you come fromWales?
Thou whoreson mad compound ofmajesty,
by this light flesh and corruptblood, thou art welcome.
Hold, you fat fool.
I scorn you.
My lord, he will drive you outof your revenge
and turn all to a merriment, ifyou take not the heat.
You whoreson candle-mine, you.
How vilely did you speak of meeven now
before this honest, virtuous,civil gentlewoman.
Oh, now, God's blessing on yourgood heart.
So she is, by my troth.
Didst thou hear me?
Yea, and you knew me,
as you did when you ran away byGadshill.
You knew I was at your back
and spoke it on purpose to trymy patience.
No, no, no; not so.
No, I did not think thou wastwithin hearing.
I shall drive thee then toconfess the willful abuse,
and then I know how to handleyou.
No abuse, Hal.
On mine honor, no abuse.
Not to dispraise me
and call me pantler and breadchipper
and I know not what.
No abuse, Hal.
No abuse?
No abuse, Ned, i' the world.
No, no, none.
No, I dispraised him before thewicked
that the wicked might not fallin love with thee,
in which doing, I have done thepart
of a careful friend and a truesubject,
and thy father is to give methanks for it.
No abuse, Hal.
None, Ned, none.
No, faith, boys, none.
See now, whether pure fear orentire cowardice
doth not make thee wrong thisvirtuous gentlewoman
to close with us?
Is she of the wicked?
Is thine hostess here of thewicked
or thy boy of the wicked
or honest Bardolph,
whose zeal burns in his nose, ofthe wicked?
Answer, thou dead elm; answer.
The fiend hath pricked downBardolph irrecoverable,
and his face is Lucifer's privykitchen,
where he does nothing but roastmaltworms.
For the boy, well, there's agood angel about him,
but the devil outbids him too.
For the women?
For one of them, she's in hellalready
and burns poor souls.
For the other, I owe her money,
and whether she be damned forthat, I know not.
No, I warrant.
Who knocks so loud at door?
Peto.
My lord!
How now, Peto.
What's the news?
The king your father is atWestminster,
and there are 20 weak andwearied posts
come from the north.
And as I came along, I met andovertook a dozen captains,
bareheaded, sweating, knockingat the taverns,
and asking everyone for Sir JohnFalstaff.
By heaven, Poins, I very much toblame,
so idly to profane the precioustime.
Give me my sword and cloak.
Falstaff, good night.
Oh, now, now comes in thesweetest morsel of the night,
and we must hence and leave itunpicked.
Oh, more knocking.
How now.
What's the matter?
You must to court presently.
A dozen captains stay at doorfor you.
Farewell, hostess.
Farewell, Doll.
You see, my good wenches, howmen of merit are sought after.
The undeserver may sleep whenthe man of action is called on.
Farewell.
If I be not sent away post, Iwill see you again ere I go.
I cannot speak.
If my heart be not ready toburstó
oh, sweet Jack, have a care ofthyself.
Farewell.
Fare thee well.
I've known thee 29 years comepeascod time,
and an honester, truer-heartedman
well, fare thee well.
How many thousand of my poorestsubjects
are at this hour asleep.
Oh, sleep; oh, gentle sleep,
nature's soft nurse,
how have I frighted thee
that thou no more wilt weigh myeyelids down
and steep my senses inforgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou insmoky cribs,
upon uneasy pallets stretchingthee
and hushed with buzzing nightflies to thy slumber,
than in the perfumed chambers ofthe great,
under the canopies of costlystate,
and lulled with sound ofsweetest melody?
Oh, thou dull god,
why liest thou with the vile inloathsome beds
and leav'st the kingly couch
a watchcase or a common larumbell?
Wilt thou, upon the high andgiddy mast,
seal up the shipboy's eyes
and rock his brains
in cradle of the rude, imperioussurge
and in the visitation of thewinds,
who take the ruffian billows bythe top,
curling their monstrous heads
and hanging them with deafingclamor in the slippery clouds,
that, with the hurly, deathitself awakes?
Canst thou, oh, partial sleep,
give thy repose to the wetseaboy in an hour so rude,
and in the calmest and moststillest night,
with all appliances and means toboot,
deny it to a king?
Then happy low, lie down.
Uneasy lies the head that wearsa crown.
Many good morrows to YourMajesty.
Is it good morrow, lords?
'Tis 1:00, and past.
Why, then, good morrow to youall, my lords.
Have you read o'er the lettersthat I sent you?
We have, my liege.
Then you perceive the body ofour kingdom,
how foul it is;
what rank diseases grow,
and with what danger, near theheart of it.
It is but as a body yetdistempered,
who to his former strength maybe restored
with good advice and littlemedicine.
My lord Northumberland will soonbe cooled.
Oh, God.
That one might read the book offate
and see the revolution of thetimes make mountains level
and the continent, weary ofsolid firmness,
melt itself into the sea.
And, other times, to see
the beachy girdle of the oceantoo wide for Neptune's hips.
How chances mock
and changes fill the cup ofalteration with divers liquors.
Oh, if this were seen,
the happiest youth, viewing hisprogress through,
what perils past, what crossesto ensue,
would shut the book, and sit himdown and die.
'Tis not ten years gone sinceRichard and Northumberland,
great friends, did feasttogether,
and in two years after were theyat wars.
It is but eight years
since this Percy was the mannearest my soul,
who, like a brother, toiled inmy affairs
and laid his love and life undermy foot.
Yea, for my sake,
even to the eyes of Richard gavehim defiance.
But which of you was byó
you, cousin Nevil, as I mayrememberó
when Richard, with his eyebrimful of tears,
then checked and rated byNorthumberland,
did speak these words, nowproved a prophecy?
"Northumberland, thou ladder bythe which
my cousin Bolingbroke ascends mythroneó"
though then, God knows, I had nosuch intent,
but that necessity so bowed thestate
that I and greatness werecompelled to kiss.
"The time shall come," thus didhe follow it,
"The time will come, that foulsin, gathering head,
shall break into corruption," sowent on,
foretelling this same time'scondition
and the division of our amity.
There is a history in all men'slives,
figuring the natures of thetimes deceased.
The which observed, a man mayprophesy with a near aim
of the main chance of things asyet not come to light,
which in their seeds and weakbeginnings lie entreasured.
Such things become the hatch andbrood of time.
And by the necessary form ofthis,
King Richard might create aperfect guess
that great Northumberland, thenfalse to him,
would of that seed grow to agreater falseness,
which should not find a groundto root upon, unless on you.
Are these things, then,necessities?
Then let us meet them likenecessities.
And that same word even nowcries out on us.
They say the bishop andNorthumberland
are 50,000 strong.
It cannot be, my lord.
Rumor doth double, like thevoice and echo,
the numbers of the feared.
Please it, Your Grace, to go tobed.
Upon my soul, my lord,
the powers you already have sentforth
will bring this prize in veryeasily.
To comfort you the more,
I have received a certaininstance that Glendower is dead.
Your Majesty hath been thisfortnight ill,
and these unseasoned hours mustadd perforce
unto your sickness.
I will take your counsel.
And were these inward wars onceout of hand,
we would, dear lords, unto theHoly Land.
Come on; come on; come on, sir.
Give me your hand, sir.
An early stirrer, by the rood.
And how doth my good cousinSilence?
Good morrow, good cousinShallow.
And how doth my cousin, yourbedfellow,
and your fairest daughter andmine, my goddaughter Ellen?
Alas, a black ousel, cousinShallow.
By yea and nay.
I daresay my cousin William isbecome a good scholar.
He is at Oxford still, is henot?
Indeed, sir, to my cost.
A' must, then, to the inns o'court shortly.
I was once of Clement's Inn,
where I think they will talk ofmad Shallow yet.
You were called "lusty Shallow"then, Cousin.
By the mass, I was calledanything.
And I would have done anythingindeed, too, and roundly too.
There was I and little John Doitof Staffordshire
and black George Barnes andFrancis Pickbone
and Will Squele, a Cotswold man.
You had not four such swingebucklers
in all the inns o' court again.
And I may say to you,
we knew where the bona-robaswere
and had the best of them all atcommandment.
Then was Jack Falstaff, now SirJohn,
a boy and page to ThomasMowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
This Sir John, Cousin,
that comes hither anon aboutsoldiers?
The same Sir John; the verysame.
I see him break Skogan's head atthe court gate
when a' was a crack not thushigh.
And the very same day
did I fight with one SampsonStockfish, a fruiterer,
behind Gray's Inn.
Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that Ihave spent.
And to see how many of my oldacquaintance are dead.
We shall all follow, Cousin.
Certain, 'tis certain; verysure, very sure.
Death, as the Psalmist saith, iscertain to all.
All shall die.
How a good yoke of bullocks atStamford fair?
By my troth, I was not there.
Death is certain.
Is old Double of your townliving yet?
Dead, sir.
Jesu, Jesu, dead.
A' drew a good bow, and dead.
Dead.
A' shot a fine shoot.
John a Gaunt loved him well andbetted much money on his head.
Dead.
A' would clap you in the cloutat 12 score
and carried you a forehand shafta 14, a 14 1/2,
that it would have done a man'sheart good to see.
How a score of ewes now?
Thereafter as they be.
A score of good ewes may beworth ten pounds.
And is old Double dead?
Here comes one of Sir JohnFalstaff's men, as I think.
Good morrow, honest gentlemen.
I beseech you, which is MasterJustice Shallow?
I am Robert Shallow, sir; a pooresquire of this county,
and one of the king's justicesof the peace.
What is your good pleasure withme?
My captain, sir, commends him toyou.
My captain, Sir John Falstaff,
a tall gentleman, by heaven, anda most gallant soldier.
He greets me well.
I knew him a good backsword man.
How doth the good knight?
And may I ask how my lady hiswife doth?
Sir, pardon.
A soldier is better accommodatedthan with a wife.
That is very good, i' faith; andit is very good indeed too.
Better accommodated.
It is good; yea, indeed, is it.
Good phrases surely are, andever were, very commendable.
Accommodated.
It comes from "accommodo."
Very good; a good phrase.
Pardon me, sir; I have heard theword.
Phrase call you it?
By this good day, I know not thephrase,
but I will maintain the word
with my sword to be asoldierlike word,
by heaven, and a word ofexceeding good command.
By heaven.
Here comes good Sir John.
Give me your hand, sir.
Give me Your Worship's goodhand.
By my troth, you like well, andyou bear your years very well.
Welcome, good Sir John.
I am glad to see you well, goodMaster Robert Shallow.
Master Surecard, as I think?
No.
No, Sir John, it is my cousinSilence
in commission with me.
Good Master Silence,
it well befits you should be ofthe peace.
Your good Worship is welcome.
Why, fie, gentlemen.
This is hot weather.
Have you provided me here half adozen sufficient men?
Marry, have we, sir.
Will you sit?
Well, I beseech you, let me seethem.
Where's the roll?
Let me see; let me see; let mesee.
So, so, so, so.
Yea, marry, sir.
Ralph Mouldy.
Let them appear as I call.
Let them do so; let them do so.
Ralph Mouldy.
Where is Mouldy?
Here, an't please you.
What think you, Sir John?
A good-limbed fellow:
young, strong, and of goodfriends.
Is thy name Mouldy?
Yea, an't please you.
'Tis the more time thou wertused.
Most excellent, i' faith.
Things that are moldy lack use.
Very singular good, Sir John.
Well said, i' faith, Sir John.
Very well said.
Prick him.
I was pricked well enoughbefore,
an you could have let me alone.
My old dame will be undone now
for one to do her husbandry andher drudgery.
You need not to have pricked me.
There are other men fitter to goout than I.
Go to; go to.
Peace, Mouldy; you shall go.
Mouldy, it is time you werespent.
Spent.
Peace, fellow, peace.
Stand aside.
Know you where you are?
Yes, well, for the other, let meseeó
Simon Shadow.
Let me have him to sit under.
He's like to be a cold soldier.
Where's Shadow?
Here, sir.
Whose son art thou, Shadow?
Myómy mother's son, sir.
Thy mother's son.
Like enough, and thy father'sshadow.
Do you like him, Sir John?
Shadow will serve for summer.
Prick him.
Thomas Wart.
Wart?
Where's he?
Here, sir.
Is thy name Wart?
Yea, sir.
Thou art a very ragged wart.
Shall I prick him, Sir John?
It were superfluous,
for his apparel is built uponhis back,
and the whole frame stands uponpins.
Prick him no more.
You can do it, Sir John; you cando it.
I commend you well.
Francis Feeble.
Here, sir.
What trade art thou, Feeble?
A woman's tailor, sir.
Oh.
Shall I prick him, Sir John?
Well, you may, but if he'd beena man's tailor,
he'd ha' pricked you.
Wilt thou make as many holes inan enemy's battle
as thou hast done in a woman'spetticoat?
I will do my good will, sir.
You can have no more.
Well said, good woman's tailor.
Well said, courageous Feeble.
Thou wilt be as valiant
as the wrathful dove or mostmagnanimous mouse.
Prick the woman's tailor.
Well, Master Shallow; deep,Master Shallow.
Who's next?
Peter Bullcalf of the green.
Yea, marry, let me see Bullcalf.
Here, sir.
'Fore God, there's a likelyfellow.
Here, prick me Bullcalf till heroar again.
Oh, Lord.
Good my lord captainó
Dost thou roar before thou artpricked?
Oh, Lord, sir.
I am a diseased man.
Oh, now what disease hast thou?
A whoreson cold, sir.
Oh.
A cough, sir, which I got withringing in the king's affairs
upon his coronation day.
Come, come.
Thou shalt go to the wars in agown.
We'll have away thy cold.
And I will take such order
that thy friends shall ring forthee.
Is here all?
Here is two more called thanyour number, Sir John.
You must have but four here,sir.
And so, I pray you, go in withme to dinner.
Come, I'll go drink with you,but I cannot tarry dinner.
By my troth, I'm glad to seeyou, good Master Robert Shallow.
Oh, Sir John, do you remembersince we lay all night
in the windmill in SaintGeorge's field?
No more of that, Master Shallow.
No more of that.
'Twas a merry night.
And is Jane Nightwork alive?
She lives, Master Shallow.
She never could away with me.
Never, no, no.
She would always say she couldnot abide Master Shallow.
By the mass, I would anger herto the heart.
She was then a bona-roba.
Doth she hold her own well?
Old, old, Master Shallow.
Nay, she must be old.
She cannot choose but be old.
Certain she's old
and had Robin Nightwork by OldNightwork
before I came to Clement's Inn.
That's 55 years ago.
Cousin Silence, that you hadseen that
that this knight and I haveseen.
Said I well, Sir John?
We have heard the chimes atmidnight, Master Shallow.
That we have.
That we have; that we have.
I' faith, Sir John, we have.
Our watchword was "Hem boys."
Come, let's to dinner; come,let's to dinner.
Oh, Jesus, the days that we havespent.
Hem boys.
Good Master Corporal Bardolph,stand my friend.
Here's four Harry ten shillingsin French crowns for you.
In very truth, sir, I had aslief be hanged, sir, as go.
And yet, for mine own part, sir,I do not care.
But rather, because I amunwilling,
and, for mine own part, have adesire to stay with my friends.
Else I do not care, for mine ownpart, so much, sir.
Go to; stand aside.
And, good Master CorporalCaptain,
for my old dame's sake, stand myfriend.
She has nobody to do anythingabout her when I am gone;
and she is old and cannot helpherself.
You shall have 40, sir.
Go to.
Stand aside.
By my troth, I care not; a mancan die but once.
We owe God a death.
I'll ne'er bear a base mind.
An't be my destiny, so; an't benot, so.
No man's too good to serve'sprince.
And let it come when it will.
If a man die this year, he isquit of it the next.
Well said.
Thou art a good fellow.
Faith, I'll bear no base mind.
Which men shall I have?
Four of which you please.
Sir, a word with you.
I have three pounds to freeMouldy and Bullcalf.
Go to.
Well.
Come, Sir John, which four willyou have?
Do you choose for me.
Marry, then, Bullcalfó
Bullcalf, Mouldy, Shadow, andFeeble.
Mouldy and Bullcalf.
For you, Mouldy, stay at hometill you are past service.
And for your part, Bullcalf,grow till you come unto it.
I'll none of you.
Sir John, Sir John, do notyourself wrong.
They are your likeliest men.
I would have you served with thebest.
Will you tell me, MasterShallow, how to choose a man?
Care I for the limb, the thews,the stature, bulk,
and big assemblance of a man?
Give me the spirit, MasterShallow.
Here, take Wart.
You see what a ragged appearanceit has.
A' shall charge you,
discharge you with the motion ofa pewterer's hammer.
And this same half-faced fellow,Shadow.
Give me this man, for hepresents no mark to the enemy.
The foeman may with as great aimlevel at the edge of a penknife.
And for a retreat,
how swiftly will this Feeble,the woman's tailor, run off.
Oh, give me the spare men, andspare me the great ones.
Bardolph, put me a caliver intoWart's hand.
Wart, traverse; thus, thus,thus.
Come, manage me your caliver.
So.
Very well.
Go to.
Very good.
Exceeding good.
Oh, give me always a little,lean, old, chapped, bald shot.
Well said, Wart.
Thou art a good scab.
Hold, there's a tester for thee.
He is not his craft's master.
He doth not do it right.
I remember in Mile End Green,when I lay at Clement's Innó
I was then Sir Dagonet inArthur's showó
we had a little quiver fellow
who would manage you his piecethus.
And about and about, and comeyou in and come you in.
And "rah-tah-tah," would a' say,and "bounce" would a' say,
and away again would a' go, andagain would a' come.
These fellows will do well,Master Shallow.
One, twoócome onó three, four.
God keep you, Master Silence.
I will not use many words withyou.
Gentlemen both, farewell.
I thank you.
I must a dozen miles tonight.
Bardolph, lead the men away.
Hey, hup.
Hup, aye, hup, aye, hup, aye,hup, aye, hup, aye, hup, aye.
The Lord bless you, Sir John.
God prosper your affairs.
God send us peace.
Oh, God send us peace.
Now return visit our house.
Let our old acquaintance berenewed.
Peradventure I will with you tothe court.
'Fore God, I would you would.
Go to.
I have spoke at a word.
As it isó
God keep you, Sir John.
God keep you.
May God keep you.
Farewell.
Fare you well, gentle gentlemen.
As I return,
I will fetch off these justices.
I do see the bottom of JusticeShallow.
Lord, Lord, how subject we oldmen are to this vice of lying.
This same starved justice hathdone nothing but prate to me
of the wildness of his youth
and the feats he hath done aboutTurnbull Streetó
and every third word a lie.
I do remember him at Clement'sInn
like a man made after supper ofa cheeseparing.
When a' was naked, he was, forall the world,
like a forked radish
with a head fantastically carvedupon it with a knife.
A' was the very genius offamine,
yet lecherous as a monkey.
And the whores called himmandrake.
And now is this vice's daggerbecome a squire
and talks as familiarly of Johna Gaunt
as if he'd been sworn brother tohim,
and I'll be sworn he never sawhim but once in the tiltyard,
and then he broke his head
for crowding among the marshal'smen.
And now has he land and beefs.
Well, I'll be acquainted withhim, if I return.
If the young dace be a bait forthe old pike,
I see no reason in the laws ofnature but I may snap at him.
Let time shape, and there anend.
My friends and brethren in thesegreat affairs...
I must acquaint you that I havereceived
new dated letters fromNorthumberland,
their cold intent, tenor, andsubstance thus:
here doth he wish his person,
with such powers as might holdsortance with his quality,
the which he could not levy,
whereupon he is retired, to ripehis growing fortunes,
to Scotland,
and concludes in hearty prayers
that your attempts may overlive
the hazard and fearful meetingof their opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him
touch ground and dash themselvesto pieces.
Now, what news?
West of this forest, scarcelyoff a mile,
in goodly form come on theenemy.
And by the ground they hide,
I judge their number in or nearthe rate of 30,000.
The just proportion that we gavethem out.
Let us sway on and face them inthe field.
Health and fair greeting fromour general,
the prince, Lord John, and dukeof Lancaster.
Say on, my lord of Westmoreland,in peace.
What doth concern your coming?
Then, my lord,
unto Your Grace do I in chiefaddress
the substance of my speech.
You, lord archbishop,
wherefore do you so illtranslate yourself
out of the speech of peace whichbears such grace
into the harsh and boisteroustongue of war,
turning your books to graves,your ink to blood,
your pens to lances, and yourtongue divine
to a loud trumpet and a point ofwar?
Wherefore do I this?
So the question stands.
Briefly, to this end.
We are all diseased,
and with our surfeiting andwanton hours
have brought ourselves into aburning fever,
and we must bleed for itó
of which disease our late king,Richard, being infected, died.
I have in equal balance justlyweighed
what wrongs our arms may do,what wrongs we suffer,
and find our griefs heavier thanour offences.
We see which way the stream oftime doth run
and are enforced from our mostquiet there
by the rough torrent of occasion
and have the summary of all ourgriefs,
when time shall serve, to showin articles,
which long ere this we offeredto the king
and might by no suit gain ouraudience.
When we are wronged and wouldunfold our griefs,
we are denied access unto hisperson
even by those men that most havedone us wrong.
When ever yet was your appealdenied?
Wherein have you been galled bythe king?
What peer hath been suborned tograte on you
that you should seal thislawless bloody book
of forged rebellion with a sealdivine
and consecrate commotion'sbitter edge?
My brother general, thecommonwealth
I make my quarrel in particular.
There is no need of any suchredressó
or if there were, it not belongsto you.
Why not to him in part,
and to us all that feel thebruises of the days before,
and suffer the conditions ofthese times
to lay a heavy and unequal handupon our honors?
Oh, my good Lord Mowbray,
construe the times to theirnecessities
and you shall see indeed,
it is the time and not the kingthat doth your injuries.
But this is mere digression frommy purpose.
Here come I from our princelygeneral to know your griefs,
to tell you from His Grace thathe will give you audience,
and wherein it shall appear thatyour demands are just,
you shall enjoy them...
everything set off that might somuch as think you enemies.
Then take, my lord ofWestmoreland,
this schedule,
for this contains our generalgrievances.
This will I show the general.
Let it please you, lords,
in sight of both our battles wemay meet,
and either end in peace, whichGod so frame,
or to the place of difference,
call the swords, which mustdecide it.
My lord, we will do so.
There is a thing within my bosomtells me
that no conditions of our peacecan stand.
Fear you not that.
If we can make our peace uponsuch large terms and so absolute
as our conditions shall consistupon,
our peace shall stand as firm asrocky mountains.
Yea, but our valuation shall besuch
that every slight and falsederived cause,
yea, every idle, nice, andwanton reason
shall to the king taste of thisaction;
that, were our royal faithsmartyrs in love,
we shall be winnowed with sorough a wind
that even our corn will seem aslight as chaff
and good from bad find nopartition.
No, no, my lord.
Note this.
The king is weary of dainty andsuch picking grievances,
for he hath found to end onedoubt by death
revives two greater in the heirsof life.
Besides, the king hath wastedall his rods
on late offenders,
that he now doth lack the veryinstruments of chastisement,
so that his power, like to afangless lion,
may offer, but not hold.
'Tis very true.
And therefore be assured, mygood lord marshal,
if we do now make our atonementwell,
our peace will, like a brokenlimb united,
grow stronger for the breaking.
Be it so.
Here returns my lord ofWestmoreland.
The prince is here at hand.
Pleaseth your lordship to meetHis Grace
just distance twixt our armies.
You are well encounter'd here,my cousin Mowbray.
Good day to you, gentle lordarchbishop,
And so to you, Lord Hastings,and to all.
My lord of York, it bettershowed with you
when that your flock, assembledby the bell,
encircled you to hear with thereverence
your exposition on the holy text
than now to see you here an ironman,
cheering a rout of rebels withyour drum,
turning the word to sword andlife to death.
Oh, who shall believe
but you misuse the reverence ofyour place,
employ the countenance and graceof heaven
as a false favorite doth hisprince's name,
in deeds dishonorable?
You have ta'en up, under thecounterfeited zeal of God,
the subjects of his substitute,my father,
and both against the peace ofheaven and him
have here upswarmed them.
Good my lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against yourfather's peace,
but, as I told my lord ofWestmoreland,
the time misordered doth, incommon sense,
crowd us and crush us to thismonstrous form,
to hold our safety up.
I sent Your Grace the parcelsand particulars of our grief,
the which hath been with scornshoved from the court,
whereon this Hydra son of war isborn,
whose dangerous eyes may well becharmed asleep
with grant of our most just andright desires.
Pleaseth Your Grace to answerthem directly
how far forth you do like theirarticles.
I like them all and do allowthem well
and swear here, by the honor ofmy blood,
my father's purposes have beenmistook,
and some about him have toolavishly
wrested his meaning andauthority.
My lord, these griefs shall bewith speed redressed.
Upon my soul, they shall.
If this may please you,
discharge your powers unto theirseveral countiesó
My lordó
As we will ours.
And here between the armies
let's drink together friendlyand embrace,
that all their eyes may bearthose tokens home
of our restored love and amity.
I take your princely word forthese redresses.
I give it you and will maintainmy word.
And thereupon I drink unto YourGrace.
Go, Captain, and deliver to thearmy this news of peace.
Let them have pay, and part.
I know it will well please them.
Hie thee, Captain.
To you, my noble lord ofWestmoreland.
I pledge Your Grace.
And, if you knew what pains Ihad bestowed
to breed this present peace,
you would drink freely.
But my love to you shall showitself more openly hereafter.
I do not doubt you.
I am glad of it.
Health to my lord and gentlecousin, Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happyseason,
for I am, on the sudden,something ill.
Against ill chances men are evermerry,
but heaviness foreruns the goodevent.
Therefore be merry, coz,
since sudden sorrow serves tosay thus,
"Some good thing comestomorrow."
Believe me, I am passing lightin spirit.
The more, the worse, if your ownrule be true.
The word of peace is rendered.
Hark, how they shout.
This had been cheerful aftervictory.
A peace is in the nature of aconquest,
for then both parties nobly aresubdued,
and neither party loser.
Go, my lord, and let our army bedischarged too.
And, good my lord, so pleaseyou, let our trains march by us,
that we may peruse the men weshould have coped withal.
Go, good Lord Hastings,
and, ere they be dismissed, letthem march by.
I trust, lords, we shall lietonight together.
Now, Cousin, wherefore standsour army still?
The leaders, having charge fromyou to stand,
will not go off until they hearyou speak.
They know their duties.
My lord, our army is dispersedalready.
Like youthful steers unyoked,
they take their courses east,west, north, south;
or, like a school broke up,
each hurries towards his homeand sporting place.
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings,
for the which I do arrest thee,traitor, of high treason.
And you, Lord Archbishop, andyou, Lord Mowbray,
of capitol treason I attach youboth.
Is this proceeding just andhonorable?
Is your assembly so?
Will you thus break your faith?
I pawned thee none.
I promised you redress
of these same grievances whereofyou did complain,
which, by mine honor,
I will perform with a mostChristian care.
But for you, rebels, look totaste
the due meet for rebellion andsuch acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you thesearms commence,
fondly brought here andfoolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums.
Pursue the scattered stray.
God, and not we, hath safelyfought today.
What is your name, sir?
Of what condition are you and ofwhat place?
I am a knight, sir, and my nameis Colevile of the dale.
Well, then, Colevile is yourname
and knight is your degree andyour place the dale.
Colevile shall still be yourname,
a traitor your degree,
and the dungeon your place, aplace deep enough.
So should you be still Colevileof the dale.
Are not you Sir John Falstaff?
As good a man as he, sir,whoever I am.
Do ye yield, sir, or shall Isweat for you?
I think you are Sir JohnFalstaff,
and in that thought yield me.
Here comes our general.
Come, hie thee, sir.
The heat is past; follow nofurther now.
Call in the powers, good cousinWestmoreland.
Now, Falstaff, where have youbeen all this while?
When everything is ended, thenyou come.
These tardy tricks of yourswill, on my life,
one time or other break somegallows' back.
I would be sorry, my lord, butit should be thus.
I never knew yet but rebuke andcheque was the reward of valor.
Do you think me a swallow, anarrow, or a bullet?
Have I, in my old and poormotion,
the expedition of thought?
I have speeded hither
with the very extremest inch ofpossibility.
And here, travel tainted as Iam,
have in my pure and immaculatevalor,
taken Sir John Colevile of thedale,
a most furious knight andvalorous enemy.
But what of that?
He saw me and yielded,
that I may justly say,
with the hooknosed fellow ofRome,
"I came, saw, and overcame."
It was more of his courtesy thanyour deserving.
I know not.
Here he is, and here I yieldhim.
And I beseech Your Grace,
let it be booked with the restof this day's deeds,
or, by the Lord, I'll have it ina particular ballad else,
with mine own picture on the topon't,
Colevile kissing my foot.
Therefore let me have right, andlet desert mount.
Thine's too heavy to mount.
Well, let it shine, then.
Thine's too thick to shine.
Well, let it do something, mygood lord,
that will do me good, and callit what you will.
Is thy name Colevile?
It is, my lord.
A famous rebel art thou,Colevile.
And a famous true subject tookhim.
I am, my lord, but as my bettersare that led me hither.
Had they been ruled by me,
you should have won them dearerthan you have.
How they sold themselves, I knownot,
but thou, like a kind fellow,gavest thyself away gratis.
And I thank thee for thee.
Send Colevile with hisconfederates to York,
to present execution.
And now dispatch we toward thecourt, my lords.
I hear the king my father issore sick.
Our news shall go before us toHis Majesty,
which, Cousin, you shall bear tocomfort him,
and we with sober speed willfollow you.
My lord, I beseech you,
give me leave to go throughGloucestershire.
And when you come to court,
stand, my good lord, in yourgood report.
Fare you well, Falstaff.
I, in my condition, shall betterspeak of you than you deserve.
I would you had but the wit.
'Twere better than your dukedom.
Good faith,
this same young, sober-bloodedboy doth not love me,
nor a man cannot make him laugh.
That's no marvel.
He drinks no wine.
There's never none of thesedemure boys comes to any proof,
for thin drink doth so overcooltheir blood
and making many fish meals
that they fall into a kind ofmale greensickness.
And then when they marry, theyget wenches.
They are generally fools andcowards,
which some of us would be, too,but for inflammation.
A good sherris sack hath atwofold operation.
It ascends me into the brain;
dries me there all the foolish
and dull and curdy vapors whichenviron it;
makes it apprehensive, quick,forgetive,
full of nimble, fiery, anddelectable shapes;
which, delivered o'er to thevoice,
the tongue, which is the birth,becomes excellent wit.
The second property of yourexcellent sherris
is the warming of the blood,which, before cold and settled,
left the liver white and pale,
which is the badge ofpusillanimity and cowardice.
But the sherris warms it,
makes it course from the inwardsto the parts extreme.
It illumineth the face, which asa beacon gives warning
to all the rest of this littlekingdom, man, to arm.
And then the vital commoners andinland petty spirits
muster me all to their captain,the heart,
who, great and puffed up withthis retinue,
doth any deed of courage.
And this valor comes of sherris.
So that skill in the weapon isnothing without sack,
for that sets it awork,
and learning a mere hoard ofgold kept by a devil,
till sack commences it and setsit in act and use.
Hereof comes it that PrinceHarry is valiant,
for the thin blood
which he did naturally inheritfrom his father,
he hath, like lean, sterile, andbare land,
manured and husbanded and tilledwith excellent endeavor
of drinking good and good storeof fertile sherris,
that he is become very hot andvaliant.
If I had a thousand sons,
the first humane principle Iwould teach them should be
to forswear thin potations andaddict themselves to sack.
Captain!
The army is discharged all andgone.
Let them go.
I'll through Gloucestershire,
and there will I visit MasterRobert Shallow, esquire.
I have him already temperingbetween my finger and my thumb,
and shortly will I seal withhim.
Come, away.
Now, lords, if God doth givesuccessful end
to this debate that bleedeth atour doors,
we will our youth lead on tohigher fields
and draw no swords but what aresanctified.
Our navy is addressed, our powercollected,
our substitutes in absence wellinvested,
and everything lies level to ourwish.
Only, we lack a little personalstrength;
and pause us till these rebels,now afoot,
come underneath the yoke ofgovernment.
Of both which we doubt not butYour Majesty shall soon enjoy.
Humphrey, my son of Gloucester,
where is the prince yourbrother?
I think he's gone to hunt, mylord, at Windsor.
And how accompanied?
I do not know, my lord.
Is not his brother, Thomas ofClarence, with him?
No, my good lord; he is inpresence here.
What would my lord and father?
Nothing but well to thee, Thomasof Clarence.
How chance thou art not with theprince thy brother?
He loves thee, and thou dostneglect him, Thomas.
Thou hast a better part in hisaffection
than all thy brothers.
Cherish it, my boy,
and noble offices thou maysteffect of mediation,
after I am dead,
between his greatness and thyother brethren.
Therefore omit him not.
Blunt not his love, nor lose thegood advantage of His Grace
by seeming cold or careless ofhis will,
for he is gracious, if he beobserved.
He hath a tear for pity
and a hand open as day formelting charity.
Yet notwithstanding, beingincensed, he's flint,
as humorous as winter
and as sudden as flaws congealedin the spring of day.
His temper, therefore, must bewell observed.
Chide him for faults, and do itreverently,
when you perceive his bloodinclined to mirth.
But, being moody, give him lineand scope,
till that his passions, like awhale on ground,
confound themselves withworking.
Learn this, Thomas,
and thou shalt prove a shelterto thy friends,
a hoop of gold to bind thybrothers in,
that the united vessel of theirblood,
mingled with venom ofsuggestionó
As, force perforce, the age willpour it inó
shall never leak, though it dowork as strong
as aconitum or more rashgunpowder.
I shall observe him with allcare and love.
Why art thou not at Windsor withhim, Thomas?
He is not there today.
He dines in London.
And how accompanied?
Canst thou tell that?
With Poins and other hiscontinual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soilto weeds.
And he, the noble image of myyouth, is overspread with them.
Therefore my grief stretchesitself beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heartwhen I do shape
in forms imaginary the unguideddays
and rotten times that you shalllook upon
when I am sleeping with myancestors.
For when his headstrong riothath no curb,
when rage and hot blood are hiscounselors,
when means and lavish mannersmeet together,
oh, with what wings shall hisaffections fly
to fronting peril and opposeddecay.
My gracious lord, you lookbeyond him quite.
The prince but studies hiscompanions
like a strange tongue, wherein,to learn the language.
'Tis necessary that the mostimmodest words
be looked upon and learnt,
which once attained, YourHighness knows,
comes to no further use but tobe known and hated.
So like gross terms, the princewill in the perfectness of time
cast off his followers.
And their memory shall as apattern or a measure live,
by which His Grace must mete thelives of others,
turning past evils toadvantages.
'Tis seldom when the bee dothleave her comb
in the dead carrion.
Who's here?
Westmoreland?
Health to my sovereign,
and new happiness added to thatthat I am to deliver.
Prince John your son doth kissYour Grace's hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop,Hastings, and all
are brought to the correction ofyour law.
There is not now a rebel's swordunsheathed,
but peace puts forth her oliveeverywhere.
Oh, Westmoreland, thou art asummer bird,
which ever in the haunch ofwinter sings
the lifting up of day.
And there's more news.
The earl Northumberland and thelord Bardolph,
with a great power of Englishand of Scots,
are by the shrieve of Yorkshireoverthrown.
And wherefore should these goodnews make me sick?
Will fortune never come withboth hands full,
but write her fair words stillin foulest letters?
She either gives a stomach andno food.
Such are the poor in health.
Or else a feast and takes awaythe stomach.
Such are the rich that haveabundance and enjoy it not.
I should rejoice now at thishappy news.
And now my sight fails and mybrain is giddy.
Oh, me.
Come near me.
Now I am much ill.
Comfort, Your Majesty.
Oh, my royal father.
My sovereign lord, cheer upyourself,
Look up.
Be patient, princes.
You do know, these fits are withHis Highness very ordinary.
Stand from him.
Give him air.
He'll straight be well.
No, no, he cannot long hold outthese pangs.
The incessant care and labor ofhis mind
hath wrought the mure thatshould confine it in
so thin that life looks throughand will break out.
This apoplexy will certain behis end.
Softly, pray.
Who saw the duke of Clarence?
I am here, brother, full ofheaviness.
How now.
Rain within doors and noneabroad.
How doth the king?
Exceeding ill.
Heard he the good news yet?
Tell it him.
He altered much upon the hearingit.
If he be sick with joy, he'llrecover without physic.
Not so much noise, my lords.
Sweet prince, speak low.
The king your father is disposedto sleep.
Let us withdraw into the otherroom.
Please it Your Grace to go alongwith us?
No, I will sit and watch here bythe king.
Why doth the crown lie thereupon his pillow,
being so troublesome abedfellow?
Oh, polished perturbation.
Golden care.
It keeps the ports of slumberopen wide
to many a watchful night.
Sleep with it nowó
yet not so sound and half sodeeply sweet
as he whose brow with homelybiggen bound
snores out the watch of night.
Oh, majesty,
when thou dost pinch thy bearer,
thou dost sit like a rich armorworn in heat of day
that scalds with safety.
By his gates of breath
there lies a downy feather whichstirs not.
Did he suspire,
that light and weightless downperforce must move.
My gracious lord?
My father?
This sleep is sound indeed.
This is a sleep that from thisgolden rigol
hath divorced so many Englishkings.
Thy due from me is tears andheavy sorrows of the blood,
which nature, love, and filialtenderness,
shall, oh, dear Father, pay theeplenteously.
My due from thee is thisimperial crown,
which, as immediate as thy placeand blood,
derives itself to me.
Lo, where it sits, which Godshall guard.
And put the world's wholestrength into one giant arm,
it shall not force this linealhonor from me.
This from thee will I to mineleave, as 'tis left to me.
Warwick.
Gloucester and Clarence.
Doth the king call?
What would Your Majesty?
How fares my lord?
Why did you leave me here alone,my lords?
We left the prince my brotherhere, my liege,
who undertook to sit and watchby you.
The Prince of Wales?
Where is he?
Find him.
He is not here.
The door is open.
He is gone this way.
He came not through the chamberwhere we stayed.
Where is the crown?
Who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my lord, weleft it there.
The prince hath ta'en it hence.
Go seek him out.
Is he so hasty that he dothsuppose my sleep my death?
Find him, my lord of Warwick.
Chide him hither.
This part of his conjoins withmy disease
and helps to end me.
See, sons, what things you are.
How quickly nature falls intorevolt
when gold becomes her object.
For this the foolish,overcareful fathers
have broke their sleep withthoughts,
their brains with care, theirbones with industry.
For this they have beenthoughtful to invest
their sons with arts and martialexercises.
When, like the bee,
culling from every flower thevirtuous sweets,
our thighs with wax, our mouthswith honey packed,
we bring it to the hive, and,like the bees,
are murdered for our pains.
This bitter taste.
But wherefore did he take awaythe crown?
Lo, where he comes.
Come hither to me, Harry.
Depart the chamber.
Leave us here alone.
I never thought to hear youspeak again.
Thy wish was father, Harry, tothat thought.
I stay too long by thee.
I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for mineempty chair
that thou wilt needs invest theewith my honors
before thy hour be ripe?
Oh, foolish youth.
Thou seek'st the greatness thatwill overwhelm thee.
Stay but a little, for my cloudof dignity
is held from falling with soweak a wind
that it will quickly drop.
My day is dim.
Thou hast stolen that whichafter some few hours
were thine without offence.
And at my death thou hast sealedup my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thoulovedst me not,
and thou wilt have me dieassured of it.
What canst thou not forbear mehalf an hour?
Then get thee gone and dig mygrave thyself,
and bid the merry bells ring tothine ear
that thou art crowned, not thatI am dead.
Let all the tears that shouldbedew my hearse
be drops of balm to sanctify thyhead.
Only compound me with forgottendust.
Give that which gave thee lifeunto the worms.
Pluck down my officers, break mydecrees,
for now a time is come to mockat form.
Harry V is crowned
Up, vanity.
Down, royal state.
All you sage counselors, hence.
And to the English courtassemble now,
from every region, apes ofidleness.
For the fifth Harry
from curbed license plucks themuzzle of restraint,
and the wild dog shall flesh histooth on every innocent.
Oh, my poor kingdom, sick withcivil blows.
When that my care could notwithhold thy riots,
what wilt thou do when riot isthy care?
Oh, thou wilt be a wildernessagain,
peopled with wolves, thy oldinhabitants.
Oh, pardon me, my liege.
But for my tears, the moistimpediments unto my speech,
I had forestalled this dear anddeep rebuke
ere you with grief had spoke
and I had heard the course of itso far.
There is your crown,
and he that wears the crownimmortally long guard it yours.
If I affect it more than as yourhonor and as your renown,
let me no more from thisobedience rise,
which my most inward, true, andduteous spirit teacheth,
this prostrate and exteriorbending.
God witness with me, when I herecame in
and found no course of breathwithin Your Majesty,
how cold it struck my heart.
If I do feign, oh, let me in mypresent wildness die
and never live to show theincredulous world
the noble change that I havepurposed.
Coming to look on you, thinkingyou dead,
and dead almost, my liege, tothink you were,
I spake unto this crown ashaving sense
and thus upbraided it.
"The care on thee depending hathfed upon the body of my father.
"Therefore, thou best of goldart worst of gold.
"Other, less fine in carat, ismore precious,
"preserving life in medicinepotable.
"But thou, most fine, mosthonored, most renowned,
hast eat thy bearer up."
Thus, my most royal liege,accusing it,
I put it on my head,
to try with it as with an enemy
that had before my face murderedmy father.
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my bloodwith joy
or swell my thoughts to anystrain of pride,
if any rebel or vain spirit ofmine
did with the least affection ofa welcome
give entertainment to the mightof it,
let God forever keep it from myhead
make me as the poorest vassal is
that doth with awe and terrorkneel to it.
Oh, my son,
God put it in thy mind to takeit hence
that thou mightst win the morethy father's love,
pleading so wisely in excuse ofit.
Come hither, Harry.
Sit thou by my bed and hear, Ithink, the very latest counsel
that ever I shall breathe.
God knows, my son,
by what bypaths and indirect,crooked ways I met this crown;
and I myself know well howtroublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend withbetter quiet,
better opinion, betterconfirmation,
for all the soil of theachievement
goes with me into the earth.
It seemed in me but as an honorsnatched with boisterous hand,
and I had many living
to upbraid my gain of it bytheir assistances,
which daily grew to quarrel andto bloodshed,
wounding supposed peace.
All these bold fears thou see'stwith peril I have answered,
for all my reign hath been butas a scene acting that argument.
And now my death changes themood.
For what in me was purchased
falls upon thee in a more fairersort,
so thou the garland wear'stsuccessively.
Yet, though thou stand'st moresure than I could do,
thou art not firm enough, sincegriefs are green.
And all my friends, which thoumust make thy friends,
have but their stings and teethnewly ta'en out,
by whose fell working I wasfirst advanced
and by whose power I well mightlodge a fear
to be again displaced,
which to avoid, I cut them off,
and had a purpose now to leadout many to the Holy Land,
lest rest and lying still mightmake them look
too near unto my state.
Therefore, my Harry, be it thycourse to busy giddy minds
with foreign quarrels.
That action, hence borne out,
may waste the memory of theformer days.
More would I, but my lungs arewasted
so that strength of speech isutterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, oh, Godforgive;
and grant it may with thee intrue peace live.
My gracious liege,
you won it, wore it, kept it,gave it me.
Then plain and right must mypossession be,
which I with more than with acommon pain
'gainst all the world willrightfully maintain.
Doth any name particular
belong unto the lodging where Ifirst did swoon?
'Tis called Jerusalem, my noblelord.
Laud be to God.
Even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to memany years,
I should not die but inJerusalem,
which vainly I supposed the HolyLand.
But bear me to that chamber.
There I'll lie.
In that Jerusalem shall Harrydie.
By cock and pie, sir, you shallnot away tonight.
What, Davy, I say.
You must excuse me, MasterRobert Shallow.
I will not excuse you; you shallnot be excused.
Excuses shall not be admitted.
There is no excuse shall serve.
You shall not be excused.
Why, Davy, Ió
Here, sir.
Davy, Davy, Davy,let me see,Davy.
Let me see.
Ah, marry, William cook, bid himcome hither.
Sir John, you shall not beexcused.
Marry, sir, thus,
those precepts cannot be served,and, again, sir,
shall we sow the headland withwheat?
With red wheat, Davy.
But for William cook, have we noyoung pigeons?
Yes, sir.
Sir, here is now the smith'snote
for shoeing and plough irons.
Well, let it be cast and paid.
Sir John, you shall not beexcused.
Now, sir, a new link to thebucket must needs be had.
And, sir, do you mean to stopany of William's wages
about the sack he lost the otherday at Hinckley fair?
A' shall answer it.
Let him cook some pigeons, Davy,a couple of short-legged hens,
some  joint of mutton,
and some, any pretty, little,tiny kickshaws;
tell William cook.
Doth the man of war stay allnight, sir?
Yea, I will use him well, Davy.
A friend at court is better thana penny in purse.
And for his men, use them well,
for they are arrant knaves andwill backbite.
No worse than they arebackbitten,
for they have marvelous foullinen.
Well conceited, Davy.
About thy business, Davy.
Where are you, Sir John?
Come, come, come.
Off with your boots.
Give me your hand, good MasterBardolph.
By Your Worship.
I thank thee from my heart.
And welcome, my tall fellow.
Come, Sir John.
I'll follow you, Master RobertShallow.
Bardolph.
What?
Look to our horses.
If I were sawed into quantities,
I should make four dozen of suchbearded hermits' staves
as Master Shallow.
It's a wonderful thing to seethe semblable coherence
of his men's spirits and his.
They, by observing of him,
do bear themselves like foolishjustices.
He, by conversing with them,
is turned into a justice-likeservingman.
It's certain that either wisebearing
or ignorant carriage is caught,
as men take diseases, one ofanother.
Therefore let men take heed ofthe company they keep.
I will devise matter enough outof this Shallow
to keep Prince Harry incontinual laughter.
Oh, you shall see him laugh
till his face be likea wet cloakill laid up.
Sir John.
I come, Master Shallow.
How doth the king?
Excellent well.
His cares are now all ended.
I hope, not dead.
He's walked the way of nature.
To our purposes, he lives nomore.
I would His Majesty had calledme with him.
The service that I truly did hislife
hath left me open to allinjuries.
Indeed, I think the young kingloves you not.
I know he doth not
and do arm myself to welcome thecondition of the time,
which cannot look more hideouslyupon me
than I have drawn it in myfantasy.
Here come the heavy issue ofdead Harry.
Oh, that the living Harry
had the temper of either worstof these three gentlemen.
How many nobles then might keeptheir place
that must strike sail to spiritsof vile sort.
Oh, God, I fear all will beoverthrown.
Good morrow, and God save YourMajesty.
This new and gorgeous garment,majesty,
sits not so easy on me as youthink.
Brothers, you mix your sadnesswith some fear.
This is the English, not theTurkish court.
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,but Harry Harry.
Yet be sad, good brothers,
for, by my faith, it very wellbecomes you.
Sorrow so royally in you appears
that I will deeply put thefashion on
and wear it in my heart.
Why then, be sad.
But entertain no more of it,good brothers,
than a joint burden laid upon usall.
For me, by heaven, I bid you beassured,
I'll be your father and yourbrother too.
Let me but bear your love, andI'll bear your cares.
Yet weep that Harry's dead, andso will I.
But Harry lives that shallconvert those tears
by number into hours ofhappiness.
We hope no otherwise from YourMajesty.
You all look strangely on me,
and you most.
You are, I think, assured I loveyou not.
I am assured, if I be rightlymeasured,
Your Majesty hath no just causeto hate me.
No?
How might a prince of my greathopes
forget so great indignities youlaid upon me?
What?
Rate, rebuke, and roughly sendto prison
the immediate heir of England.
Was this easy?
May this be washed in lethe andforgotten?
I then did use the person ofyour fatheró
the image of his power lay thenin meó
and, in the administration ofhis law,
whiles I was busy for thecommonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forgetmy place,
the majesty and power of law andjustice,
the image of the king whom Ipresented,
and struck me in my very seat ofjudgment,
whereon, as an offender to yourfather,
I gave bold way to my authorityand did commit you.
If this were ill done,
be you contented wearing now thegarland,
to have a son set your decreesat naught,
to pluck down justice from yourawful bench,
to trip the course of law andblunt the sword
that guards the peace and safetyof your person.
Behold yourself so by a sondisdained,
and then imagine me taking yourpart
and in your power soft silencingyour son.
After this cold considerance,sentence me.
And, as you are a king,
speak in your state what I havedone
that misbecame my place, myperson,
or my liege's sovereignty.
You are right, Justice,
and you weigh this well.
Therefore still bear the balanceand the sword.
And I do wish your honors mayincrease
till you do live to see a son ofmine
offend you and obey you, as Idid.
So shall I live to speak myfather's words.
"Happy am I that have a man sobold
"that dares do justice on myproper son,
"and not less happy, having sucha son,
"that would deliver up hisgreatness
so into the hands of justice."
You did commit me,
for which, I do commit into yourhand the unstained sword
that you have used to bear, withthis remembrance:
that you use the same
with the like bold, just, andimpartial spirit
that you have used 'gainst me.
There is my hand.
You shall be as a father to myyouth.
My voice shall sound as you doprompt mine ear,
and I will stoop and humble myintents
to your well-practiced, wisedirections.
And, princes all, believe me, Ibeseech you.
My father is gone wild into hisgrave,
for in his tomb lie myaffections.
And with his spirit sadly Isurvive
to mock the expectation of theworld, to frustrate prophecies,
and to raze out rotten opinion,
who hath writ me down after myseeming.
The tide of blood in me
hath proudly flowed in vanitytill now.
Now doth it turn and ebb back tothe sea,
where it shall mingle with thestate of floods
and flow henceforth in formalmajesty.
Now call we our high court ofparliament.
And let us choose such limbs ofnoble counsel
that the great body of our statemay go
in equal rank with the bestgoverned nation,
that war or peace or both atonce
may be as things acquainted andfamiliar to us,
in which you, Father, shall haveforemost hand.
Our coronation done, we willaccite,
as I before remembered, all ourstate.
And, God consigning to my goodintents,
no prince nor peer shall havejust cause to say,
"God shorten Harry's happy lifeone day."
God save the king!
Sir John, you shall see myorchard,
where, in an arbor,
we will eat the last year'spippin of my own grafting
and a dish of caraways, and soforth.
Come, cousin Silence, and thento bed.
'Fore God, you have a goodlydwelling here and rich.
Barren, barren, barren.
Beggars all; beggars all, SirJohn.
Marry, good air.
Well spread, Davy; well spread,Davy.
Well said, Davy.
This Davy serves you in gooduses.
He is your servingman and yourhusband.
He's a good varlet, a goodvarlet, a good varlet.
He's a good varlet, Sir John.
Oh, by the mass, I have drunktoo much sack at supper.
A good varlet.
Now sit down.
Come on.
Come, Cousin.
Ah, sirrah, quotha,
we shall do nothing but eat andmake good cheer
and praise God for a merry year,
when flesh is cheap and femalesdear
and lusty lads roam here andthere,
so merrily, so merrily,
and ever anon so merrily.
There's a merry heart.
Good Master Silence, I'll giveyou a health for that anon.
Davy, give Master Bardolph somewine.
Sweet sir, sit.
I'll be with you anon.
Most sweet sir, sit.
Master page, good master page,sit.
And what you want in meat, we'llhave in drink.
But you must bear.
The heart's all.
Master Bardolph, be merry,
and, my little soldier there, bemerry.
Be merry; be merry.
My wife has all.
Women are shrews, both short andtall.
'Tis merry in hall when beardslack all
and welcome merry shrovetide.
Be merry; be merry.
I did not think Master Silence
to have been a man of thismettle.
An't please your worship,
there's one Pistol come from thecourt with news.
From the court?
Let him come in.
How now, Pistol.
Sir John, God save you.
What wind blew you hither,Pistol?
Not the ill wind that blows noman to good.
Sweet knight,
thou art now one of the greatestmen in this realm.
Sir John, I am thy Pistol andthy friend.
And helter-skelter have I rodeto thee,
and tidings do I bring
and lucky joys and golden timesand happy news of price.
I pray you now, deliver themlike a man of this world.
A fouter for the world andworldlings base.
I speak of Africa and goldenjoys.
Oh, base Assyrian knight, whatis thy news?
Let King Cophetua know the truththereof.
Give me your pardon, sir.
If, sir, you come from the courtwith news,
I take it there's but two ways,
either to utter them or concealthem.
I am, sir, under the king, insome authority.
Under which king, Besonian?
Speak or die.
Under King Harry.
Harry IV or
Harry IV.
A fouter for thine office.
Sir John, thy tender lambkin nowis king.
Harry V's the man.
If Pistol lie, do this
and fig me like the braggingSpaniard.
What?
Is the old king dead?
As nail in door.
The things I speak are just.
Bardolph.
Away, Bardolph.
Saddle my horse.
Master Robert Shallow,
choose what office thou wilt inthe land.
'Tis thine.
Pistol, I will double chargethee with dignities.
Oh, joyful day.
I would not take a knighthoodfor my fortune.
I do bring good news.
Master Robert Shallowó my LordShallowó
be what thou wilt.
I am fortune's steward.
But go on.
Get on thy boots.
We'll ride all night.
Oh, sweet Pistol.
Away, Bardolph.
Here, boot, boot, MasterShallow.
I know the young king is sickfor me.
Oh, let us take any man'shorses.
The laws of England are at mycommandment.
Blessed are they that have beenmy friends,
and woe to my lord chiefjustice.
Come!
Stand back!
Standóstand here by me, MasterRobert Shallow.
I will make the king do yougrace.
I will leer upon him as a' comesby.
And do but mark the countenancehe will give me.
God bless thy lungs, goodknight.
Come here, Pistol.
Stand behind me.
Oh, I would I'd had time to havemade new liveries.
I would have bestowed
the thousand pound I borrowed ofyou.
But 'tis no matter.
This poor show doth better.
This doth infer the zeal I hadto see him.
It doth so.
It shows my earnestness ofaffection.
It dothó
My devotionó
It doth; it doth; it doth.
As it were, to ride day andnight,
and not to deliberate, not toremember,
not to have patience to shiftmeó
'Tis best, certain.
But to stand stained with travel
and sweating with desire to seehim,
thinking of nothing else,
putting all affairs else intooblivion,
as if there were nothing else tobe done but to see him.
God save Thy Grace, King Hal.
My royal Hal.
God save thee, my sweet boy.
My lord chief justice, speak tothat vain man.
Have you your wits?
Know you what 'tis you speak?
My king.
My Jove.
I speak to thee, my heart.
I know thee not, old man.
Fall to thy prayers.
How ill white hairs become afool and jester.
I have long dreamt of such akind of man,
so surfeit swelled, so old, andso profane.
But, being awaked, I do despisemy dream.
Make less thy body hence andmore thy grace.
Leave gormandizing.
Know the grave doth gape forthee
thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool bornjest.
Presume not I am the thing Iwas,
for God doth know, so shall theworld perceive,
that I have turned away myformer self.
So will I those that kept mecompany.
When thou dost hear I am as Ihave been,
approach me, and thou shalt beas thou wast,
the tutor and feeder of myriots.
Till then, I banish thee, onpain of death,
as I have done the rest of mymisleaders,
not to come near our person byten mile.
For competence of life, I willallow you
that lack of means enforce younot to evils.
And, as we hear you do reformyourselves,
we will, according to yourstrengths and qualities,
give you advancement.
Be it your charge, my lord,
to see performed the tenor ofour word.
Set on.
God save the king!
Master Shallow,
I owe you a thousand pound.
Marry, Sir John,
which I beseech you to let mehave home with me.
That can hardly be, MasterShallow.
Do not you grieve at this.
I shall be sent for in privateto him.
Look, he must seem thus to theworld.
Fear not your advancement.
I shall be the man yet that willmake you great.
I cannot perceive how,
unless you give me your doubletand stuff me out with straw.
I beseech you, Sir John,
let me have 500 of my 1,000.
Sir, I will be as good as myword.
This that you heard was but acolor.
A color I fear you will die in,Sir John.
Oh, no, fear no colors.
Come.
Go with me to dinner.
Come, Lieutenant Pistol.
Come, Bardolph.
I shall be sent for to him inprivate at night.
Carry Sir John Falstaff to thefleet.
Take all his company along withhim.
My lord.
I cannot now speak.
I shall hear you soon.
Take them away.
"Si fortuna me tormenta, sperome contento."
I like this fair proceeding ofthe king's.
He hath intent his wontedfollowers
shall all be very well providedfor,
but all are banished till theirconversations
appear more wise and modest tothe world.
And so they are.
The king hath called hisparliament, my lord.
He hath.
I will lay odds that, ere thisyear expire,
we bear our civil swords andnative fire as far as France.
I heard a bird so sing, whosemusic, to my thinking,
pleased the king.